Instructor's final review: Edgar Allen Poe project, Fall 2024

This is an ideal model of what a project in this class should look like: not that every project should be identical to it, but in that the goals are clearly set out and beautifully achieved.

The project sought to study the majority of Poe's short and short-ish stories in two particular ways: the themes of the stories, and Poe's use of literary devices (figures of speech). Each story was assigned only one overall theme, while figures of speech are tagged at the sentence or sub-sentence level. There are reading views of every story in the collection together with analysis pages on the Themes and Figures of Speech; those analysis pages include SVGs generated by XSLT from collection data. 

Some of the XSLT work also broke new ground for this class in experimentation. Not only did the main stylesheet generate all the parallel output reading views (as a few have done before), but it was also written to generate at the same time a completely different <xsl:result-document> in the form of the table of contents page. This had the advantage that as each story XML was judged to be finished, only a single XSLT had to be run to incorporate it both into the corpus of the reading views and into the table of contents page.

There are a few remaining glitches: some text appears to be missing from The Oblong Box (and possibly other reading-view pages) and several stories do not have any Figures of Speech tagged in the HTML output. In the case of The Oblong Box, at least, the missing text appears to be that contained in the <char> and <conversation> elements, which were not used in the XSLT in the end and appear to have gotten in the way of it. This suggests that the XML markup was not all completed, or at least not all to the same standard.

The HTML also indicates "No theme recorded" on many story pages; but the themes are given in the XML, suggesting a lapse in the XSLT that should have pushed that attribute value over (as it successfully does for the table of contents page). 

These are quality-control issues that are particularly difficult on a project with so many separate input XML source documents. Locating them requires someone going systematically through one XML or output HTML after another to root out any anomalies, often doing this several times over the course of the project. 

None of this detracts, however, from the positive assessment of the project as a whole. In addition to the members' hard work on the project, its success was facilitated by the remarkably supportive and harmonious tone among its members, set at the beginning of the project and carried through to the end of the semester. A good team brings out the best in each of its members and allows them to create something not just quantitatively but qualitatively better than any one of them could have developed. This is perhaps the most important takeaway for any future teams looking back at this project.

-Dr. Campbell, 17-DEC-2024